Advanced Machine Learning
2025/2026 - 2nd Semester
We Need More Butterflies!
Pedro Carvalho
Gabriel Cortˆes
Nuno Louren¸co
Jo˜ao Correia1 Introduction
We present here the second practical project, part of the students’ evaluation
process of the Advanced Machine Learning course of the Master’s in Artificial
Intelligence and Data Science of the University of Coimbra. This work is to
be done autonomously by a group of two students. The deadline for
delivering the work is 1st of June 2026 via Inforestudante. The quality of
your work will be judged as a function of the value of the technical work,
the written description, and the public defence. All sources used to perform
the work (including the code) must be clearly identified. The document
may be written in Portuguese or in English, using a word processor of your
choice1. The written report is limited to 10 pages long The document
should be well structured, including a general introduction, a description
of the problem, the approach, the experimental setup, an analysis
of the results, and a conclusion. The report must follow the Springer
LNCS format. The LATEX and Word templates are available in the Support
Material of the course. The final mark will be given to each member of
the group individually. To do the work, the student may consult any source
he/she wants. Nevertheless, plagiarism will not be allowed, and if detected, it
will result in failing the course. While doing the work and when submitting it,
you should pay particular attention to the following aspects (whose relative
importance depends on the type of work done):
• description of the approach to the problem
• description of the general architecture of the methods used;
• description of the experiment, including a table with the parameters
used, which should allow full replication;
• description of the evaluation metrics used for the validation: quality of
the final result, efficacy, efficiency, diversity, or any other most appropriate;
Do not forget, besides what was just said, that it is fundamental: (1) to
do a correct experimental analysis; (2) to do an informed discussion about
the results obtained; (3) to put in evidence the advantages of the chosen
alternative.
1LATEX is preferred
22 Problem Statement
Generative models are designed to learn the underlying distribution of a
dataset and generate new data points that could plausibly come from the
same distribution. Discriminative models make predictions based on specific
traits, such as classifying photographs of animals. In contrast, generative
models have the ability to create new instances of data, such as generating
a new image of an animal.
Image classification with deep neural networks typically required a considerable amount of data to operate with good performance. When there is not
that much data, data augmentation strategies are commonly used to tackle
the issue. Moreover, aside from simple transformations, generative models
have also been used to augment datasets in order to improve the performance
of the base model.
In the previous work, you modified the classifier architecture and used
simple data augmentation techniques to enhance its performance. In this
work, you are tasked to improve the performance of a pre-determined image
classifier by augmenting the dataset with images generated by generative
models. The idea is to use generative models to generate additional samples
for the training dataset, with the overall aim of improving the classifier’s
performance. To be clear, the baseline model should be used as is, i.e.,
without any modification to its architecture, optimizer, or loss function. As
for the training, you should follow what you learned in the previous work
and use the same strategy for both baseline and for the model trained with
generated data as well (for example, if you define n epochs and an early
stopping mechanism, this should be applied to all models).
3 Objective
The main objective is to analyse the dataset, prepare and train generative
approaches that learn to generate more data for the training dataset of a
predefined CNN. To do that, you should attend to the following objectives:
• Prepare the machine learning pipeline for the image classification dataset;
• Analyse the baseline CNN model provided;
• Prepare the ML pipeline to train with augmented datasets, i.e. baseline
dataset + generated samples;
3• Explore solutions to perform data augmentation via generative machine
learning models to improve the performance of the current baseline
model;
• Explore solutions and compare the results using at least the following
Generative models:
– Any form of AutoEncoders;
– Any form of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN);
– (optional) Any form of Diffusion models;
• Compare the results to the baseline model with and without the generative samples added to the training dataset.
Exploring other solutions than the listed ones that are suitable for the
problem at hand and considered as extra work, can be as compensation points
to cover problems in the listed ones above up to a 10% compensation.
3.1 Dataset
The dataset for this project is a comprehensive collection of macro-photographs
specifically curated for high-granularity species identification. It features
75 distinct classes of butterflies, comprising over 5199 labeled images
(inclusive of the validation set). The task is structured as a multi-class
classification problem, where each image is assigned to a single, mutually
exclusive butterfly category.
The data is organized into a hierarchical directory structure. Upon extraction, the Train directory serves as the primary repository for model
development. This directory contains all the images. The labels are in the
train.csv file, including specialized species such as:
• Southern Dogface, Adonis, and Brown Siproeta;
• Monarch, Green Celled Cattleheart, and Cairns Birdwing;
• Eastern Dapple White, Red Postman, and Mangrove Skipper.
Figure 1 illustrates the visual diversity and intra-class variance present in
the training set.
Folders containing the images of each class in the dataset are provided.
The main goal is to use this data to design, implement and validate your
approaches and the test will be used to evaluate the generalisation ability of
your models through a Kaggle competition (check Section 4).
4Figura 1: Representative samples from the 75-class Lepidoptera dataset.
3.2 Evaluation Metrics
For the image classification task, given the training dataset, you should split
it into train, validation, and test to see how to fit the models that you
are training/creating. Thus, the validation part of this work is crucial and
you should select the most appropriate set of metrics and justify them.
For the generative models, you have metrics proposed on the literature
to understand how well the generate images follow the same distribution of
the training dataset. Some examples include the following metrics: Incepton
Score, Fr´echet Inception Distance, Structural Similarity index (SSIM).
In this particular problem, the idea is to improve the baseline model performance by generating more data for the training dataset. This means that
you will have access to the data, code, and model of the baseline, and your
5focus should be to augment the dataset and check the improvement in the
performance without tweaking or changing the baseline classifier. You should
only change the dataset and train the baseline model as in the script provided with the augmented dataset. You must deliver the augmented dataset
alongside the project code and report.
4 Competition
To evaluate the generalisation ability of the developed models, we are going
to use a Kaggle competition. Note that it will not impact the final mark but
rather will act as a way for you to access the progress you are making and
evaluate the generalisation performance of your models. The competition is
available at the following address:
https://www.kaggle.com/t/c9215348ab0b4f2b9880e3ec818d87ec
To participate in the competition, you should prepare a csv file with
two columns: the first column contains the Id of the sample that you are
classifying, and the second column should contain the corresponding classification label. An example of a submission file is provided along with the
project statement.
5 Conclusion
A few short comments. First, the control of the progression of your work will
be done during the classes (T and PL). Moreover, you can discuss eventual
problems by presenting yourself during office hours. Second, the projects
reflect for the most part your actual knowledge. Third, we try to balance
the difficulty of all the work, but we are aware that this is not an easy task
and it is somehow a subjective matter. Fourth, we try to ask for a workload
compatible with the value of the work for the final mark.
Methodological issues, like the statistical background, were elucidated
during the previous lectures. You may use the statistical tool you feel at
ease with, including the Python code that was provided. Finally, even if this
is a work that asks you to do simulations and analyse the results, i.e., it has
a practical flavour, there is however a theory behind the work, and you are
advised to consult the necessary literature.
Good luck!
6